Se.g.i.t.a.i/Cascade
Sources Version 1.0
Compiled with CC65 2.11.9


This is the source pack to the BCC-Party 2007 Release
"Se gitai o Ilios" (http://www.berlinc64club.de and
http://noname.c64.org/csdb/release/?id=56368)


To compile the sources you need a newer version of make
(http://www.gnu.org/software/make/), because older
versions have a bug which make "make" quit with
"Error -1" under some unknown circumstances.

The source-tree has following structure:

The Intro and the Main-Part has 2 distinct folders
with some sub-directories added.
In the root-dir there is the main-program of the intro, 
the linker config file, the makefile and the executable. 
The folder "subs" contains all the subroutines, 
which must be compiled seperately and 
linked to the main-program.
The folder datafiles contains all the stuff which is 
appended with ".incbin". 
Under "subs\headers" are all the prototypes found,
which are included in the C-parts of the program.

The Main-Part is hiding in the directory "mountains",
which also contains the folders "datafiles", "subs"
and headers. The main-part has a seperate makefile,
which should be executed by changing to the directory
"mountains" and then type make.
The main-part also has a seperate linker-config file.

Normally make only executes all the steps necessary to
compile the parts of the program, which changed.
If you don't want that (for example, if you only changed
a header file), then type "make clean".
In the makefile for the main-part there is a flag called 
"DEBUG". This flag has nothing to do with "NDEBUG" 
used by "assert.h".
If "DEBUG" is 1, then you don't get the pretty part, like
you maybe expect to see. Instead you see bars in the border
representing how much rastertime the routines need and a
debug sprite layer and debug rasterbars.
The 3 pixel high area in the sprite layer reflects the 
area covered entirely by the clowds. This is the
switching area, where the background colors and charsets
and softscroll registers are changed.
Create the paralax.exo by hand (exomizer sfx basic -n -o paralax.exo paralax.run).

The intro linked together with the paralax.exo is to big to fit into 
the lower $d000 bytes of memory. You can only load it with cards (for example AR, RR)
or you must first compress it with exomizer and then load it.



If you have more questions, then mail me:

montecarlos(aeeetsch)gmx.net
